---
share: true
---

# Summary of C

## Types

- statically-typed
	- The type of every expression (except those involving VLAs) is known at **compile-time**

### Arithemetic types

- `1==sizeof(char) <= sizeof(short) <= sizeof(int) <= sizeof(long) <= sizeof(long long)`
- `sizeof(signed T)==sizeof(unsigned T)` for every $T \in\{$ `char, short, int, long, long long` \}
- short and int are at least 16 bits. long is at least 32 bits. long long is at least 64 bits.
- Range of signed types: $\left[-2^{N-1}, 2^{N-1}-1\right]$. Range of unsigned types: $\left[0,2^N-1\right]$
- Whether char is signed or not is **implementation-defined.**
- Signed integer overflow is **undefined behavior**.
- **Unsigned arithmetic never overflows**: It is performed **modulo** $2^N$, where $N$ is the number of bits of that type.

### Pointer types

`PointeeType *`

- For `T!=U`, `T *` and `U *` are different types.
- The value of a pointer of type `T *` is the **address** of an object of type `T`.
- Null pointer: The pointer holding the **null pointer value**, which is a special value indicating that the pointer is "pointing nowhere".
	- A null pointer can be **obtained from `NULL`** .
- `&var` returns the address of var. The return type is **pointer** to the type of var .
- Only when a pointer is actually pointing to an object is it **dereferenceable**.
- `*ptr`, where `ptr` is not dereferenceable, is **undefined behavior**.

### Array types

`ElemType [N]`

- Different Types
- `N` should be compile-time constant. Otherwise it is a **VLA**.
- Valid index range: $[0, N)$. Subscript out of range is **undefined behavior**.
- Decay: `a` -> `&a[0]` , `T[N]` -> `T *`

Pointer to array: `T (*)[N]` . Array of pointers: `T *[N]` .

### `struct`

A special data type consisting of a sequence of **members**.

- The type name is `struct StructName` .
- `sizeof (struct X)` $\geqslant \sum_{\text {member } \in X}$ `sizeof (member)`

## Variables

- Declare: `Type varName`
	- Array: `ElemType varName[N]`
	- Pointer to Array: `T (*varName)[N]`
- Initialize: `= initializer`
	- Brace-enclosed list initializer for arrays and `struct`s: `= { ... }`
		- Designators for arrays: `= {[3] = 5, [7] = 4}`
		- Designators for `struct`s: `= {.mem1 = x, .mem2 = y}` .

## Initialization

Variable declared without explicit initializer

- For global or local **`static`** variables, they are empty-initialized:
	- `0` for integer types,
	- `+0.0` for floating-point types,
	- *null pointer value* for pointer types.
- For local non-`static` variables, they are uninitialized, holding *indeterminate values*

These rules apply recursively to the elements of arrays and the members of `struct`s.
Any use of the value of an uninitialized variable is **undefined behavior**

## Scopes and name lookup

## Expressions

- Operator precedence, associativity, and evaluation order of operands
- The only four operators whose operands have deterministic evaluation order:
	- `&&` and `||` : short-circuit evaluation
	- `?:`
	- `,` (not in a function call or in an initializer list)
- If the evaluation order of `A` and `B` is **unspecified**, and if
	- both `A` and `B` contain a write to an object, or
	- one of them contains a write to an object, and the other one contains a read to that object
- then the behavior is **undefined**.

## Arithmetic operators

- `+, -, *, /, %`
	- Division: **Truncated** -> `0`
	- `(a / b) * b + (a % b) == a`
	- For `+` , `-` , `*` and `/` , the operands undergo a series of ***type conversions*** to a common type.
- Bitwise
	- `~, &, |, ^, <<, >>`
- Compound `a op= b <=> a = a op b`
- In/Decrease
- ==Be careful with signed overflows==

## Pointer arithmetic

- Pointer arithmetic: Plus(Increase), Minus(Decrease)
- Pointer arithmetic uses the units of the pointed-to type.
	- `p + i == (char *)p + i * sizeof(*p)`


## Function

### Pointer to function

```c
void f();

// void *p = f
void (*pf)(void) = f;
// f() == pf();
```

